um leading off today our mr. Richard
Helms who was the director of the CIA
during the period in question and mr.
Tom Cara maecenas who was the deputy
director for plans during that period
they are appearing together at the
witness table and the gentlemen I asked
you to stand out to take the oath you
solemnly swear that all the testimony
you will give in this proceeding will be
the truth the whole truth nothing but
the truth so help you God or I ask
Council to commence with the questions
since I understand that you do not have
an opening statement that's right I I
have a letter that I'd like to read that
came to me this morning from mr. Colby
the present director of the CIA it reads
as follows
dear mr. chairman at the Proceedings of
your committee on the morning of 16
September 1975 I may have conveyed an
impression which I did not intend if by
chance you or other members of the
committee got a similar impression it is
important that I clarify the record now
since it might affect your line of
questioning of future witnesses when I
was being questioned as to the
destruction of certain CIA records I was
thinking of the question in its broadest
context namely
drugs bacteriological agents and
chemical agents i thus answered that
there were indications of record
destruction in November 1972 I realized
that most listeners might have inferred
that I was indicating that records
relating to the CIA fort detrick
relationship in particular records
relating to project M
Naomie were destroyed the facts are
these records relating to CIA's drug
program in general were destroyed in
January 1973 but there is no evidence
that records of Project MK Niomi
or of the CIA Fort Detrick relationship
were destroyed other than possibly as
included in the general group in January
1973 I would appreciate it if you would
advise the other members of the
committee to this effect I also referred
mistakenly to a memorandum between
former DCI Helms and dr. Gottlieb
regarding the destruction of records
this was based on a misunderstanding
which occurred during my hurried
consultation with dr. Stevens we have no
knowledge of any such memorandum signed
by William Colby and thus becomes part
of the record in these hearings
now mr. Schwartz would you please
commence the question mr. Hellman
without going through your pedigree in
the CIA is it correct to say that you
started through the OSS you were with
the CIA from its beginning you were at
the covert side you became head of the
deputy director of plans you stayed in
that position until approximately 66
when you became deputy director of the
agency you became director of the agency
in 67 until you left in 73 no so that's
not quite correct that he the positions
are correct but I came deputy director
in 1965 and director I believe around
June 30th 1966 all right and mr. Kerem
Sini's you were at the agency in the
covert side for your entire career is
that correct that's correct and in 1970
you were deputy director for plants yes
gentlemen for your own convenience and
for the convenience of the committee
could you pull your microphones a little
closer mr. Helms were you aware that the
Central Intelligence Agency had a
capability to use bacteriological and
chemical weapons offensively yes I was
aware of that
if the one that has in one's possession
or under one's control bacteriological
or chemical weapons they can be used
both defensively and offensively and mr.
Kerr Mussina's you were also aware of
that as of 1970 and before were you not
yes and by use offensively we mean to
include killing people is that right
well they have the capacity to kill
people if they were used in that way now
did you connect the CIA's capability
with Fort Detrick a big part did you
connect the CIA's biological capability
with Fort Detrick in army facility
I don't sir know what you mean by the
word connect but the biological weapons
as you refer to them which
the agency was experimenting with were
kept for Dietrich this was a joint
program between the two organizations in
the US Army facility at Fort Dietrich
and the CIA I believe that we paid for a
Dietrich for that part of the facility
and that part of the materials which we
use now did you know mr. Helms one way
or the other whether the agency also had
in its own possession and in its own
facilities certain quantities of lethal
biological or chemical materials it was
always my impression that the
bacteriological warfare agents and
things of that kind were kept at Fort
Detrick
I realized that the agency had in its
possession in Washington and some cases
overseas stations things like L tablets
and K tablets which certainly were
lethal but which had limited uses
recognizing it's difficult to be sure of
a negative let me ask you the question
nevertheless did you know that the only
location of CIA biological weapons was
at Fort Detrick or was it possibility in
your mind that there were such weapons
located within CIA facilities themselves
I thought they were all at Fort Detrick
Mr Cameron Feeny's did you have any
different understanding I also
understood that they were at Fort
Detrick with the modification that there
might be a small amount of some of these
chemicals within the custody of the
Technical Services Division and in a CIA
facility yes
ambassador Helms at some point did you
learn that President Nixon had concluded
that the United States should renounce
biological warfare and should destroy
stocks of biological weapons yes I was
aware of this in fact I was aware that
the matter was under study from the
early days of President Nixon's
administration because I attended the
National Security Council meeting at
which he announced that he intended to
have this study made and mr. Kerem
Sini's did you at some point become
aware that President Nixon wishes to
have such materials destroyed yes
what did either one of you do if
anything to make sure that such material
in the possession of the CIA mr. Kerem
Sini's or in the possession of Fort
Detrick mr. Helms should be destroyed
are you directing the first question of
mr. Perriman why don't you say waters
day or why don't you take it first mr.
ambassador and mr. Gambini sake my
recollection is that when the order was
issued to do away with these
bacteriological agents and toxins that
mr. Kerem maecenas and I agreed that we
had no choice but to comply
in fact when I say no choice I don't
mean to indicate that we wanted any
other choice I just meant that this was
we had understood that this was a an
instruction that we were to abide by and
we agreed to terminate the program and
by terminate the program you mean
terminate the program with this what's
your understanding of what was done Mr
Carr station in the same all right mr.
Kerem Sini's with respect to your answer
that you did know that TSD had in its
own possession certain biological agents
did you do anything to have those
destroy yes it was my understanding with
dr. Gottlieb
what our program be terminated but
whatever materials of this nature that
might be in the custody the agency or
were in the custody the agency would be
returned to Fort Detrick for destruction
did you instruct dr. Gottlieb to
accomplish that yes I did but I want to
elaborate on that comment
lest I leave the impression that there
was some reservation on the part of dr.
Goff Lee there's no question in my mind
about the fact that dr. Gottlieb mr.
Helms and I were of one mind as to what
we should do with the program and the
materials they should be got rid of and
instructions were accordingly issued to
dr. godly in that conversation was mr.
Helms made aware of the fact that there
were materials in the possession of the
CIA itself I can't recall would you both
look at the document previously marked
as Exhibit one which Senators is in your
book at Tab F which purports to be a
draft memorandum from mr. Kerem Acehnese
to the director of Central Intelligence
have you both seen that document
previously yes and I'd like to make a
comment with respect to that don't if I
may mr. Schwartz you please the comment
relates to a story and the Sunday in the
evening star yesterday it was a mistaken
story but it does say that the committee
provided the star or fir made available
a copy of this memorandum quote written
by me
unquote now I didn't write them I might
say mr. chairman see that that
memorandum was made available to all
newspapers as a result of the public
hearing I'm sure a feature yes I'm sure
thank you sir
I never saw this moment I never wrote
the memorandum
I never signed such a memorandum and I
was unaware of the content of the
membrane and ambassador Helms do you
never saw such a memorandum no mr.
Schwartz
now mr. ambassador I want to follow one
line with you and then my questioning
will be finished relating to your
comment that you heard early that the
president that his President Nixon was
interested in getting rid of a
biological weapons biological weapons in
the war I think that we ought to be
pretty precise about this because he was
trying to do away with the use of
bacteriological and chemical agents in
wartime there was to destroy populations
and so forth and this is the general
thrust of that whole investigation well
are you trying to take the same position
that dr. Gordon did yesterday that the
president's order didn't apply to the
CIA
no I was just trying to correct what you
were saying you were far too general in
your statement of what President Nixon
had - is it your understanding that the
president's order did apply to the CIA
certainly now after the subject was
first raised by President Nixon was
there a study group formed by the
National Security Council I would have
assumed so because when matters were
taking them under advisement at the
National Security Council
some staff mechanism went into effect to
draft the papers and the options and so
forth so that the president could make a
final decision I did you yourself
disclose to such a body such a group the
fact that the Central Intelligence
Agency had and had had biological stocks
of biological weapons I do not recall
having devotes to this group in fact I
don't think that under normal
circumstances we would have divulged a
secret activity of this kind to this
particular study group I did you divulge
such activity to mr. Kissinger who was
then the secretary of the NSC
I don't recall having discussed it with
dr. Kissinger hi did you disclose such
activity to President Nixon for the
existence of the activity in the agency
and similar activities I'm sure were
known to proper authorities over a
period of time in the particular context
of this event that you're speaking about
in other words that the president
decided to make a study of this I don't
recall mentioning this to him or
conveying the information to him in that
context let's be quite precise in
connection with that answer mr.
ambassador
did you disclose to President Nixon from
the time he took office and thereafter
the fact that the CIA had a program
which included the offensive use
capability to use offensively biological
devices in order to kill people I do not
recall having briefed President Nixon on
that or several other programs that you
will recall mr. sports that he was once
vice president for eight years and was
privy to a lot of things that were going
on in the agency then which he carried
over to the presidency so that what the
degree to which he was aware of this
program I simply don't know but you
that's the point you don't know do you
mr. Helms based upon his prior services
vice president whether or not he was
aware of the agency's program do you
know I don't I have no further questions
Smothers do you have any supplementary
questions this time
groms I'm I'm a puzzle
somewhat
it's been established by your testimony
that the CIA had in its possession
biological toxins that were subject to
the president's order that they should
be destroyed you have testified that a
special study group was set up by the
NSC pursuant to that order and that that
study group was not notified of the
possession of these materials and you
have said that you didn't think it was
appropriate to give them that kind of
information since this was a study group
of the NSC and since under the statute
you were to take your directions from
the NSC and covert operations why wasn't
it appropriate to tell this study group
of that particular capability yes sir
it's true that the statute reads that
the director of Central Intelligence
reports the National Security Council
which in effect is the president but
they report to the National Security
Council they don't necessarily report to
the National Security Council staff and
these study groups that were put
together on a whole variety of matters
over the years many of them they would
not have been made privy to secret
intelligence information unless there
was some specific request on the part of
dr. Kissinger or someone that they
should be so briefed so this was the
custom not an exception to the rule was
it also the the custom not to inform the
Secretary of State or the president
who'd indicated his interest that these
materials should be destroyed well so
you know I think that in fairness when
the president indicated that he wanted
this matter studied he had not at that
time made the decision this is a
National Security Council staff group
studied the matter and then made a
recommendation to him and it was after
that that he made the decision they
should be destroyed he hadn't made it
before well when he made the decision
that they should be destroyed
it was given great publicity and then a
memorandum which appears in your
notebook under our notebook under Tab
key would you would you please it at
number eight number eight yes sir number
eight in your book investment house
protocol prohibiting the use and war of
asphyxiating and so forth know if you
the tab is on the document itself risk
investing for I'm sorry oh this national
security decision memorandum calling
your decision to calling your attention
to this decision memorandum forty-four
it's dated February the 20th 1970 and it
is it is directed to you along with the
others the vice president secretary of
state secretary defense and the director
of the Central Intelligence Agency and
the subject of the memorandum is United
States policy on toxins and I read the
first part to you following a review a
United United States military programs
for toxins the president has decided
that one the United States will renounce
the production for operational purposes
stockpiling and use in retaliation of
toxins produced either by
bacteriological or biological processes
or by chemical synthesis now yesterday
when dr. Stevens or dr. Gordon testify
he said that he had never received at
any time any instructions from from you
or from mr. karma Sini's or any one of
his superiors in the CIA to carry out
this order nor had he ever seen the
order and that had he been shown the
order he would have destroyed the toxins
I think that's a fair summation of his
testimony he further testified that he
read about the president's policy in the
newspapers and attempted to interpret
the meaning of that policy from the way
it was carried in the newspapers now why
wasn't this order given to him in the
form of a directive to make certain that
the president's policy was implemented
well in the first place I was under the
impression that when I had asked to have
the program terminated and the
president's instructions abided by that
the Otley dr. Gottlieb would have issued
the necessary orders to his people to
see that this was done the second place
I since I it was my understanding that
these toxins and so forth were at Fort
Detrick that is the place they would
have been destroyed and thirdly as far
as this document itself is concerned I
noticed that it's classified secret and
under the requests of the White House at
that time top secret and secret
documents were restricted in their
dissemination in the agency quite
rigidly these documents came to me in
the first instance this one I'm sure I
would have passed mr. Kerem asinus but
the document itself would have gone
further than that
I don't know but I wouldn't think so so
that explains the fact that dr. Gordon
never physically saw the document that
doesn't explain the fact that you're not
certainly not testifying that a document
that of this character cannot go to the
very people to whom it is directed in
effect the people who had custody over
the very toxins that the President had
ordered destroyed well sir I'm sorry I
mean some directive some directive to
implement the president's order based
upon this memorandum uh yes sir I agree
should have been sent down to the people
who had charge of the toxin I thought
the dr. Gottlieb had done this well did
you follow up since this was national
policy that had been given worldwide
publicity to make certain that your
order had been complied with
I never went searched any facilities but
I'd been given understand that the
program had been terminated and so I
accepted that these were employees with
whom I had been associated many years I
had no reason to believe that they would
mislead me or misguide me who told you
that the toxins had been destroyed I
read about it in the newspapers this is
everything else
may I make a comment yes grammar state
editor
after the instructions were given to dr.
Gotlieb instruction with which he was in
full accord he went off to carry them
out as I testified a week ago he came
back and reported to me that the program
had been the instructions been carried
out and he was happy to be able to tell
me further that because Fort Dietrich
was going to be permitted to continue to
do defensive research in these areas he
had established an arrangement with one
of the scientists at Fort Dietrich who
would keep the agency posted on the
state of knowledge and developments in
the defensive area he was happy to tell
me this and I was happy to hear it and
that as far as I was concerned and I'm
sure as far as mr. Helms was concerned
to whom I reported this put a period to
it then aren't you shocked to discover
five years later that your orders were
not carried out and that not only 5
grams of shellfish toxin was retained
but additional quantities have been
discovered in a CIA laboratory not shot
no show disappointed perhaps but not
shocked disappointed that your orders
were not carried out and that national
policy was not implemented that's
correct but not shocked no nut shot
why not shot and I think I think dr.
Gordon answered that in his testimony as
I read it in the newspapers well mr.
Gordon's testimony was that he had great
difficulty with the order and that he
and his associates decided not to comply
with it well sir you use the word
shocked and it's been used many times in
connection with many of the activities
of the agency and I think it is conveyed
misleading impression and I would rather
say that my own reaction when I heard of
this was surprise and disappointment but
tell you since I'm under oath that I was
shocked
I don't shock easily sir apparently not
Center tower Thank You mr. chairman
mr. helm it's been established that
although you became aware of a
presidential directive to destroy a
biological and chemical weapons
stockpiles you did not issue a written
directly to agency personnel
transmitting such an instruction to
subordinates it has been shown however
the compliance were directed orally and
may have taken the form of direction -
mr. Carroll maecenas to dieto
suggestions for CIA maintenance of
chemical and biological weapons after
issuance of the order now what is
unclear is whether your order would have
or could have been applicable to such
substances stored for the CIA at Fort
Detrick or other locations by the DoD as
well as any quantities however small of
such agents which may have been in
possession of the CIA itself now the
question is what should a reasonably
prudent director of the CIA have done
under the circumstances the senator
tower I must say that I always regarded
myself as a reasonably prudent director
of the CIA at least I tried to behave in
that regard and that work in that way I
did not intend it no I understand but I
have to start my statement some little
reconstruction like I was dealing here
with mr. Kerem asinus and dr. Gottlieb
both gentlemen and officers known in the
agency for many years I don't know of
any more trustworthy and of
in the united states and these two
individuals at least based on my long
experience with it patriotic trustworthy
and loyal so when we had a discussion
about this this was as good as writing
in letters of blood as far as I was
concerned I have never known mr. Kerem
bussiness to failed to do what I asked
him to do or to come back and report to
me why he was unable to do it and I
think that when the Chairman a moment
ago was referring to our surprise that
these toxins showed up and evolved many
years later I share with mr. Kerem
maecenas my own disappointment because
frankly senator Tower we always regard
the agency as a very well disciplined
group of people I remember that when
Vice Admiral Rufus Taylor who was my
deputy for two or three years left the
agency he wrote a letter to President
Johnson and I remember in that letter he
had words to the effect that he'd never
seen a more disciplined outfit in his
life including the United States Navy
after all Admiral Taylor was a Naval
Academy graduate and a career member of
the Naval Service and once director of
Naval Intelligence so I felt that that
was a compliment from an outsider if you
like one who had not spent his life for
his career with the agency so when we
learned about this or what I learned
about it I really was frankly surprised
because it was one of the few instances
I knew of in my 25 years where an order
was disobeyed what an usual practice for
you to give oral orders or instructions
to your subordinates constantly even on
extremely important matters yes or
perhaps especially on very sensitive
matters was there is it policy not to
transmit some things in writing sir when
the day comes that an intelligence
organization particularly a secret
intelligence organization everything has
to be put in writing it's going to come
to a resounding halt I'm afraid now
yesterday there was evidence
produced regarding both the toxins and
the delivery systems and we were shown a
device resembling a GI 45 pistol in a
staff interview on September 10th you
were asked about these dart guns and I
would like to read from your testimony
of September 10th find where we find the
following comment mr. Michelle asks the
question were you aware of something
that could be fairly characterized as
being a dart gun as having been among
the devices developed and stockpiling in
this program
mr. Helens I think over the years I've
heard of dart guns in a variety of
contexts I do not recall particularly in
connection to the toxins I've heard of
dart guns with poison on the end you
know the natives used in Latin America I
believe the agency had things of that
sort you know you fired the rubber bands
or something of this kind I have no
doubt you know there was quite an artic
arsenal of the kindred things developed
by TSD over the years for use in one
context or another now during your
tenure as director did you ever consider
employing this dart gun are similar
weapons against a human target no sir I
don't recall ever having considered it
let alone authorized and it may interest
you senator Tower to know that when that
gun was put on the table in front of the
Chairman yesterday that was the first
time I'd ever seen it so these kind of
things actually remained with within TSD
and were not something that
you were you were familiar with and
detail I certainly could have seen them
if I had chosen at any time I never
chose and they were never brought to me
and so I simply state this the simple
fact that by chance I had never seen
that dart gun until yesterday
under breath
senator Mondale mr. Helms yesterday I
believe you sat through the hearings at
which mr. Gordon mr. Colby testified and
heard mr. Gordon in effect defend the
actions of his office in not destroying
the toxins on two grounds one that they
were not chemical or biological toxins
within the meaning of the presidential
order requiring destruction and two in
any event the order for destruction ran
to the Department of Defense and not to
the CIA in your judgment are either
justifications valid well sir I don't
want to characterize dr. Gordon's the
perceptions of things at the time and
what was proper and what was improper I
did listen to him yesterday afternoon
and I thought that he made a very
articulate case for what he had had in
his mind at the time and I have no
interest whatever in criticizing him I
just simply want to say that in order to
clarify this matter a little bit that as
I was listening to him yesterday I
realized that not being either a chemist
or a biologist and having no competence
either of these areas I wouldn't have
known how to write a directive that
would have been compass everything he
was talking about yesterday
so I simply can't contribute to this
except to say that it was my impression
and I say impression because I'm not an
expert that we were supposed to get rid
of these things and that's why I ordered
the program term
and these things were everything that I
thought you could draw a circle around
as applying to the president's directive
but when the scientist comes to drawing
the certain he would probably draw it
differently than I would in other words
you're testifying than your judgment
there is doubt as to whether these were
toxins within the meaning of the
presidential or I just say I don't know
sir
even today you're in doubt I have heard
no expert witness except dr. Gordon I
don't know whether somebody is some
other witness would support him or not I
understand that you have a distinguished
witness here who developed these things
in the first place and is going to
testify before you and whatever he would
say I would be prepared to accept but
that's the way I've had to do these
things what one of the defense that the
order to destroy toxins if included
within the order did not run to the CIA
well sir I don't
senator Mondale I don't think that I
want to take refuge in that kind of an
argument my understanding of what the
president wanted was that he wanted
these things got rid of yes and whether
they were in the army or in the CIA he
wanted them disposed of and I was not in
other words taking a legalistic position
on this I was just trying to abide by
what I thought were his wishes but now
the other day when we had our
off-the-record discussions you indicated
that what had happened was quote a very
serious breach of their instructions
would you still stand with that
description that is the way I felt
certainly but I had not at the time that
I made that statement heard dr. Gordon's
explanation I have not communicated with
dr. Gordon in many many years if ever so
that I didn't know what he had in his
mind I simply have made that statement
because that's based on the facts as I
knew them at that time that was what I
thought this was in any event at the
time it's your clear recollection that
it was your understanding the toxins
within the control of the CIA were to be
destroyed you ordered orally their
destruction through mr. kair maecenas
and later you were surprised
to find out that they had not been
destroyed not only later some five years
that's correct
but in any event this was a breach of
your instructions to destroy the toxins
it seems though to me what authority
does the CIA have for developing this
chemical and toxic capability that I'm
now I'm now asking the question in the
context of the pre presidential or order
where do you draw your authority to
develop such a capability sir uh these
activities as I recall it senator
Mondale started back in the early 50s I
don't remember when they started when
General Smith was the director when
Allen Dulles was the director nor do I
recall at under what rubric at that time
they made the decision to go ahead with
these things I must confess that when I
became director I do not recall going
back into the legislative or legal
history of it I simply had accepted the
fact over the years that the agency was
expected to maintain defensive
capabilities and be in the vanguard of
these exotic things for the simple
reason that a good intelligence
organization would be expected to know
what his adversaries were doing and to
be in a position to protect himself
against the offensive acts of his
adversaries during the 50s and 60s there
were occasional incidents which reminded
us that we must be very careful and stay
involved in this kind of activity for
example I think it was in the year 1957
and I want to say here that I've been
trying to refresh my memory in the last
24 hours
out these events and so if I get some
dates wrong or some names wrong I hope
the committee will forgive me I'm not
intending to mislead or falsify but I
think it was sometime around 1957 a
Russian KGB agent named Dutch insky came
to Munich and using some kind of a
poison spray or a dart or some weapon of
this kind killed one of the leaders of a
Ukrainian dissident movement that was
located in Munich Germany by the name of
Leo rabbit rebt
a couple of years later the leader of
that Ukrainian movement Bandera was
killed by a similar assault by the same
man using poison materials as I recall
it if it wasn't poisoned materials and
it was the dark with poison on it I'm
sure that the records of the West German
government will show this but in any
event there were two people that were
murdered and it is not that we assume
this the mr. satinsky subsequently
defected to the worst German government
confessed to these things and as I
believe was convicted and served some
kind of a sentence or other so this is
in the public record that this occurred
in the 60s a West German government
technician and audio technician was
sweeping and for the benefit of those
who are not technicians there is a
device whereby one can go over a room to
find out if there any listening or audio
devices having been planted in the room
having swept the West German Embassy in
Moscow he came across various
microphones and other audio
installations in the embassy and
obviously they were pulled out and the
work of the KGB or whoever put them in
was obviously brought to naught this
poor fellow one Sunday went on a train
ride up to some monastery outside of
Moscow and in the process of this
holiday of his he was sprayed with
mustard gas or some similar poison
substance on the legs as a result of
which he lost the use of his legs for
the rest of his life these exotic
matters are seldom in the hands of the
ordinary citizen so one would have to
assume that this was a KGB or a GRU
operation but were these things
occurring constantly in life the agency
obviously felt it have to keep up to
speed on these now they protect our own
people against such attacks but if the
worst came to worst we were ever asked
to by the proper authority to do
something in this field we'd be prepared
to do so mr. kair maecenas could you
tell us what you think happened which
resulted in the countermanding of your
order to destroy the taxes sir of my own
knowledge I don't know what happened
which resulted in the countermanding of
the order I don't think there was a
countermanding of the order Senator
Mondale I think there was a failure on
the part of someone to carry out an
instruction that he'd been given at
least that is the impression I get from
what I read in the newspapers of some of
the testimony however its defined you
issued an order to destroy the toxins
and in fact they were not mr. Helms mr.
Helms I and dr. Gottlieb jointly agreed
that this program had to come to an end
and dr. Gottlieb took off with with that
instruction and were you surprised then
to find out the toxins had not in fact
been destroyed yes one final question
who or what is p600 never heard of it
before thank you thank you mr.
Thank You senator Mondale senator Baker
German mm-hmm miss chalice I have reread
now the letter from director Colby to
the Chairman dated 16 September in which
he indicates that he may have misspoken
the situation with respect to the
destruction of Records it's my summary
of mr. Colby's letter that he says that
when he was being questioned and I
assume that was my question to mr. Colby
about the destruction of certain CIA
records he was thinking of the question
in its broadest context namely drugs
back geological agents and chemical
agents I had thus answered that there
were indications of record destruction
in 1972 to me that sentence says there
was a destruction in November of 1972
but it wasn't the records that you think
it was or that it may that may have been
inferred from my testimony can you give
us your DCI you were Director of Central
Intelligence at that time were you not
in 72 yes yes sir in November of 1972
can you give us any further information
in that respect what records might mr.
Colby be speaking of that were destroyed
in November of 1972 I don't know of any
records were destroyed in November of 72
there were some records on the drug
testing program which have nothing to do
with bacteriological or chemical agents
it's an entirely different thing I think
in 73 just before I had left the agency
but there were none destroyed that you
know of in 72 no sir mr. chairman I'd
like to ask either that mr. Colby
returned or that he give us a feather
supplement to his letter in that respect
because the second paragraph of the
letter would suggest that some suggest
to me that something was destroyed in
November 72 and it is not clear from the
record quiet and in view of this
witness's testimony I think that how
much important I think the committee
will follow up in an appropriate
thank you sir in the third paragraph
miss challenge mr. Colby says that I
realized that most listeners might have
inferred that I was indicating that
records relating to the CIA fort detrick
relationship in particular records
relating to project MK Naomi were
destroyed
MK Naomi being the code word for
chemical bacteriological warfare agents
yes at Fort Detrick that whole project
the facts are these mr. Colby continues
records relating to CIA's drug program
in general or destroyed in January of
1973 but there is no evidence that
records of project in Kain Naomi or of
the CIA Fort Detrick relationship were
destroyed other than possibly as
included in the general group in January
1973 during the Watergate hearings you
and I John stood a little about what was
destroyed in January of 1973 I'm sure
you recall as I recall
yes I do senator Baker yes so do i and I
won't belabor that point except to say
that I'd appreciate any further
information you could give me about the
documents that might have been destroyed
relating in general to the drug program
in January of 1970 so I don't understand
I don't understand mr. Colby's wording
there quite frankly I have testified
before the committee members this week
about what I understood has been
destroyed in connection with an entirely
separate drug testing program I wish
you'd read my testimony but as far as MK
naomi is concerned and this violet
bacteriological and chemical business I
know of no destruction I think that
probably is where we're going to end up
in this line of questioning is it fair
would you now testify or do you now
testify McCown that you have no
knowledge of the destruction of any
records at any time about
okay Naomi that is correct senator Baker
I have no recollection of any such Thank
You mr. chairman I don't mean to press
the point but in view of the
implications of the letter I do
respectfully request that we ask for
further clarification of the point that
is to say what if any records were
destroyed by the CIA relating to their
drug program relating to any key Naomi
with respect to the January 1973
destruction with respect to November
1972 destruction what I'm after is to
find out what records were destroyed why
and on whose authority a Senator Baker
may I ask your indulgence that if this
when this information is acquired from
the agency if there's anything about it
it runs counter to my recollection would
you be kind enough to advise me I will
indeed miss chance and I fully
understand the difficulties that you
have not only in trying to recall with
specificity the events of that period
but also to travel back and forth
between here and Iran or you are our
ambassador I remarked to the Chairman
previously it seems like every time we
run out of something to do we called a
comes back around to testify but if
there is any conflict most certainly I
will see that you have an opportunity to
elaborate it thank you very much thank
you senator Baker your request is a
matter of record and I instruct the
staff of this committee to pursue this
matter so that the necessary answers and
information is received by the committee
I agree with you that that question of
the destruction of records needs to be
cleared up Thank You mr. chairman I do
not allege that there was the
destruction of records but it seems to
me that in view of the testimony on
yesterday the letter today and the
testimony of this witness that the whole
question needs to be clarified and it
can be done in a number of
I appreciate your help in that very well
thanks
senator Huddleston good morning senator
Huddleston embodyment ambassador mr.
Peres maecenas chairman in response to
Senator Mondale's question to mr. Peres
maecenas about p600 mr. helm did not
have an opportunity to respond to that
have you ever heard of or do you have
any knowledge about p600 know senator
Huddleston I do not and when I was
listening to the questioning of dr.
Gordon yesterday I obviously was
wondering about this and then suddenly I
realized am I not correct that label was
written by somebody at Fort Detrick in
other words by an employee of the United
States Army not by an employee of the
agency and therefore it possibly didn't
have to do with the tricky words rubrics
code words and so forth that we use but
in any event I've never heard of it
that's quite possible I don't believe
we've established yet just who did place
that label on this merchandise you said
you were surprised or that that you had
never before seen the dart gun that was
displayed here yesterday you were
surprised but not shocked to find that
this material had been retained and
Traer to the president's order would you
be surprised or shocked to learn that
that gun or one like it had been used by
our agents against either watchdogs or
human beings I would be surprised that
had been used against human beings but
I'm not surprised that it would have
been used against watchdogs I believe
there were various experiments conducted
in an effort to find out how one could
either tranquilizer kill guard dogs in
foreign countries now that would doesn't
surprise me at all do you know whether
or not it was used in fact against
watchdogs I'm I believe that there were
experiments conducted
against dogs where that was ever used in
a live operational situation against
dogs I do not recall mr. Kerem asinus
what's your knowledge I have I have no
recollection of the actual use of any of
the materials we've been discussing
certain operational use I mean I was
never asked to approve an operational
use of any of these materials to my very
best recollection I want to add this in
fairness I'm not sure I would have been
asked if it were a question of putting
out a watchdog in connection with a
border crossing operation in you know
Southeast Asia or somewhere I am not
sure I would have been asked but how
high any case in any case I have no
recollection of having been asked and I
have no knowledge whatever of the actual
use of any of these materials against a
human being let me put it this way then
how low and the echelon of command
within the CIA would an individual be
that would have the authority to give
permission for use of any of these
weapons in any kind of circumstance they
it would have to come to me and I were
not it would have to come to me and
needless to say I would not feel
justified in giving a yes or no on my
own authority I would take it to mr.
helm you're speaking out